Hi there.
This is the De La Rue.
And welcome back.
So in the last lecture, we looked at the sublet, we wrote the sublet.
And now I want to talk a little bit about the servlet, about the lifecycle of a servlet in a container,
how the sublet gets started and how it is how it is used to service the clients, which means to service
the requests that we get from the clients.
So we are going to discuss about this sublet and also some of its super types.
So a sublet here, we are calling it as a sublet and it does not have any main method.
So that's the thing.
It doesn't have main method and a sublet is deployed within a sublet container.
We have seen that and we mentioned that it can be done either this way or in web dot XML and the container
would know that it is a sublet.
So the thing is, whenever the Tomcat container, the sublet container is started, it, for instance,
it will look at this web XML file and it will try to find all the subnets, all the sublets that are
within this particular web application.
And it does that for all the web applications that are deployed.
So but let's just assume that there is only a single Web application.
Typically what happens is we can also have this tag called Load on startup.
And what it means is as soon as the Tomcat server is started, it needs to load all of the servers.
And by loading, what we mean is it has to create an instance of this servlet in this case.
So which means it would it would invoke the default constructor.
So that's how you would create an instance.
So that's how the container would create an instance.
And this is being done at the server startup time whenever you had startup batch and it would also invoke
a method called in it.
Now the method in it is in one of the super types.
So here we have this particular expression.
We are saying it's extents has to be sorted and init method is part of one of the super types and it
essentially initializes the servlet.
But let's not get into all of that.
So this HTTP servlet is a abstract class and it is part of the Java E Library, the servlet library.
So here it is.
So this is the package name Java dot servlet dot http.
That's the package name.
And within that package we have the history type servlet and it is an abstract class and this type servlet
extends another abstract class which is in a parent package.
It is Java X dot servlet since this one is specific to HTTP, it is in specific packets, a package
called HTTP and this one is more generic.
So it's called as a generic servlet.
And let me click on that.
And generic servlet in turn implements another interface called servlet.
So at the root we have the servlet and a subtype of that is generic servlet.
And another subtype of that is the HTTP servlet.
And both generic servlet and type servlet are abstract classes, whereas solid is an interface.
And let's also look at some of the methods that it has.
So these are the lifecycle methods.
So one of them is init method here then.
So that is used to initialize the servlet.
Then this can be used to destroy the servlet.
And there is also the main method called US service.
So this is the one service method and so in generic servlet.
So this is actually the generic servlet.
I'm sorry, I thought I was showing you the servlet.
Let me click on servlet interface.
It has all of those methods in it, service and destroy.
And there are a couple of other methods.
Let's not worry about that.
So a generic servlet is is implementing it.
So it's going to have some implementation for some of those methods.
And it's an abstract class, so it's going to implement init method.
So at the server start up time, at the time when we start the server Tomcat server, it's going to
create an instance of our servlet, which is my box and it's going to invoke the init method and it's
also going to pass something called a servlet config.
And when that happens, this particular init method within the generic servlet will be invoked because
it has the implementation.
And with that we say that the servlet is initialized.
Now once it is initialized, it is ready to serve any client requests.
So it will it will be there in the memory.
So the servlet, which we have written, has been loaded and it has been initialized by invoking this
method.
Now it's already there in the memory.
And from there onwards, if the server, if the servlet container receives any request from the browser
for this particular servlet, then it is going to use the servlet and it would invoke.
A method called service on that particular servlet and the service method which is here, it will invoke
this method called service, which is inside the HTTP servlet.
And it will pass.
The servlet container would pass instances off these two interfaces.
These are also two interfaces.
One is representing the request, another, the other one is representing the response.
So the servlet container will invoke the service method and it will create two objects, one of them
for request and one of them for response.
And it will pass those objects and the service method will then use this HTTP servlet request object
and it will check if the request was was a get request or was a post request or if it was put or anything
else.
Now, if it is a get request, then it would invoke the method called do get, do get and do get is
actually overridden in our servlet.
So we have overridden the do get method in our case.
Now if the request was for post, if it was a post request, then we would have overridden the post
method.
So we strictly do not have to have this method because our request was for only do for it was a get
request.
So in the browser for instance, so we saw this, so it was actually a get request.
It would be a get request in this case because we are just getting some information from the server.
So in this case, the do get method would have to be invoked.
But the thing is that do get method would be invoked from.
Thus service method OC from the service method.
So this method, the class, this method would detect that the request is forget and it would invoke
the do get method and do get method is overridden in the subclass which we have written.
So that's how it would work.
Now the main thing to remember is so we said that at the server startup time, an instance of our servlet
will be created and it will be initialized by invoking the init method.
But after that, the same request, the same servlet would be used to service any number of requests
that are coming for that particular servlet.
So let's say at a given instance of time, there are ten requests for that servlet.
Then the same servlet instance which we wrote the my box here, the servlet, the same object would
be used to serve all of those ten requests.
So for each request that the container is going to receive, it's going to create a thread, it's going
to create a thread, or there would be a pool of threads and it would use one of them.
And to that thread it would give the object, it would give this servlet object.
Now, if there are ten requests, there would be ten.
It would create ten different threads.
But for all of those threads, it's going to it's going to pass the same servlet instance.
It's not going to create ten different instances of my box.
So just keep that in mind.
So a single servlet is going to be used for all of the requests.
That's the main thing which you need to keep in mind and to serve each of those requests.
It is going to invoke the service method.
And before invoking as it is going to invoke the service method for each of those invocations, it would
create an instance of HTTP servlet request and HTTP servlet response, and it would pass to the service
method, which I have shown here.
And the service method would invoke, depending on the HTTP method, it would invoke either do, get
or post or even do port or any of those methods corresponding to the different HTTP methods.
But usually it will be either do post or do get and or in some cases it would be do put.
So that's how it would work for all of the instances.
It would it would use the same server instance and once the service is.
Once the response is generated, the container will take all of this.
The response that this method generates and it will relate back to the server.
And once it does that, you know, this is the HTTP request and the HTTP response objects, you know,
they would go out of scope and they would be garbage collected.
So that's how a servlet works.
So at the start of the Tomcat, when we are starting the Tomcat server, it's going to create look at
the Web XML file or it would look at the scan, all of these annotations, and it would load all of
the servlet and it would invoke the initial init method.
And that's how it's going to initialize the servlet.
And once it is initialized, the servlet is ready to service any clients and the same servlet would
be used to service all of the requests that are being that the servlet container is going to receive.
So that's the thing.
And that's it.
And like I said in the earlier demo, at the very end, instead of having it in web dot XML, we can
remove this whole thing and we can just simply have it here and it would be recognized as a servlet.
So if you right click and if you create a var file and if you redeploy it and you will notice that you
can still access the web application.
So that's about it.
But the main problem with this design is you can see that all of the HTML is embedded within the servlet.
That's not a good design because in a professional company you would have UI, specialized UI developers
or frontend developers who work only on the HTML part.
And then you will have the regular software engineers who write, you know, the Java code.
Now here the HTML is embedded within the servlet.
So what it means is you need to give this Java file to a frontend developer who is not familiar with
programming language like Java.
So it would be a very unpleasant experience for frontend developers to look at this file which looks
very clumsy and to play with this HTML.
So that would be very, very one unpleasant experience.
So because of that we have the modal view controller pattern where we push this HTML into something
like a JSP file and the JSP file would have only this HTML content and that JSP file will be given to
the frontend developer.
So that way his or her life would be much more easier.
So that would be the view and this would be the servlet would act as the controller and the model would
actually get all of this data.
For instance, here we have the name of the author and we have the name of the the rating of the book.
So all of that information would be part of the manager classes, and manager classes will access the
database.
So all of that information will be fetched from the database and it would forward all of the data to
the JSP file.
And the JSP file will have this HTML, but it will fill all of these details with the data that it gets
from the controller.
So that would be the model view controller and that helps in separating our concerns here.
So separating the HTML tag, the HTML into the JSP.
I'll try to include a lecture on that.
If time permits, I will try to include a lecture on further extending this particular this particular
code.
So that's about it.
So we looked at the lifecycle of a servlet and I hope it gave you some good background on how sublets
would work.
Thank you.
And that's it for now.
And happy coding.